---
layout: post
title:  The first semester of my PhD
excerpt: Some thoughts, reflections, and lessons from my first semester as a PhD student.
---

As December ends, I want to take a moment to reflect on my first semester at graduate school.

### Classes

This semester, I took two classes:

1. CS 6210: Scientific and Data Computing I
2. CS 6230: Parallel Computing and High Performance Computing

I think I have done well in both of them. CS6210 was a theory heavy class. We dived deep into interpolation, optimization, linear systems, decomposition methods, ODEs, and Kalman filters. The assignments in this class helped me to become faster and better at using Matlab. CS6230 was considerably more difficult. The heavy theory in this class included high performance computing (cache miss analysis, memory hierarchies) and major forms of parallelism frameworks used (OpenMP, CUDA, MPI). This class involved more frequent assignments, two exams, and a project.

In the end, I have learned a great deal from these classes.


### Research

My research at the moment involves introducing scientific computing techniques in Deep Operator Networks (DeepONets) for operator learning. This semester, I have successfully migrated to using C++ for the entirety of my research (except for making plots, matplotlib is still handy for that). Migrating to C++ was a big step; it compelled me to think about my code, my thought process of implementation on a lower level than Python. After some major algorithmic improvements, I am close to obtaining promising results for our idea.

This semester, I have also learned many important lessons on the process of research itself. First and foremost of them is clarity of thinking. Oftentimes, implementing an idea leads to tunnel vision w.r.t. the overall project. A few times this semester, I needed help to remember the original reason for an experiment. A way to mitigate this is to _very clearly_ write down the reasons behind an experiment, an initial hypothesis for expected results, and preferably a meta-reasoning behind those expectations. This forces solidity in one's understanding. It is then important to keep in mind those core reasons when implementing an idea, so as to not only avoid mistakes but also know when an avenue has stopped working/or would not be in accordance with the project's idea.

More important is the ability to explain the results of an experiment, or alternately explain expected results of an experiment. I remember reading on lesswrong.com that if one is equally good at explaining any outcome, they have zero knowledge. Rationality is important in scientific work. Rationalizing unintuitive results with forced explanations can often lead to wrong conclusions. This is why a proper experiment design is important; to leave minimal chance of a certain outcome to occur as a cause of randomness as opposed to a variable change. Another important lesson I learned is to stop and think about things. In the midst of conversation, it is easy to gloss over certain points that trigger our own _known_ conclusions. But when prompted to _really stop_ and reconsider my biases, I saw by myself that there are possible places in my explanation where problems can occur; which need to be checked. I would not have checked for those problems if I had continued to assume, without re-thinking, that those problems could not possibly occur. Reevaluation is important.


### Needed Improvements

There are a number of things I need to improve upon, as a student and as a scientist-in-training. I will list only some of them here

1. **Reading**: Reading papers is an integral part of research, and vital for graduate students for many reasons. While I have read many papers for the past few months, the habit has declined more recently. My goal is read one paper a day. The solution/schedule I have in mind is simple; I need to find a block of one hour a day, every day (seven days a week), when I can sit down to read a paper. The only question is the time of day I sit down for this. Of course, the main bottleneck is the habit itself; as long as I can do it every day, the time of day does not matter. But some times are more favorable, which need to be found as soon as possible.

2. **New ideas**: Another aspect of research I am trying to actively internalize is coming up with new ideas. This is an entirely new thing for me to learn, and as such most of my hypothetical conclusions here may well be wrong soon. The best way to come up with new ideas is to read, a lot. But more than just reading papers, I have to understand a topic deeply enough that I can _confidently_ think of ways to improve it. These improvements can be theoretical or practical, in code or a new mathematical step in the process. This semester, I have tried to come up with new ideas once or twice. Both times, my ideas were half-fetched. I could not in detail explain the _reasoning_ behind my expectation of the different results of my idea before I even implemented it. Which went to show that I did not understand the topic well enough yet. Good ideas are more likely to be born out of in-depth understanding.

3. **Writing**: Writing is another integral part of a graduate student's training. I will not count any homeworks or projects here. So far, I have written technical notes for my research. I have received good feedback on most of these reports. The next step for me to improve my writing is to be able to write a paper, by myself. The difficult part about writing a paper is first and foremost to be able to tell a good scientific story. This story must not keep the readers in suspense. The readers must know exactly what my paper is about and what results I am going to show them from just the abstract. Notation must be used conservatively for it can quickly become confusing and unnecessary. But it must also be used liberally when a description demands it, for without it the explanation becomes confusing. Results need to be tied together strongly. To go a step further, a paper shows (through results) not only the strengths of a method but also its weaknesses. The method must demonstrate very clearly but not in excessive detail the thought-process of the authors to arrive at their method. The background must describe the previous work on which this work is built. If the novelty is so extreme as to not have any related parents, the method must still be contrasted with other _related_ works.


### Looking to the second semester

I have thoroughly enjoyed my first semester as a PhD student. Constantly surrounded by exceptional minds is a great pleasure for me. One of the greatest joys of graduate school is consciously observing the growth of my own mind. I am beyond excited for my next semester.

I will be taking two classes:

1. CS 6220: Scientific and Data Computing II
2. CS 6190: Probabilistic Machine Learning

I will hopefully be writing a paper for a venue very soon, so my next blog will be delayed.
