---
layout: post
title:  Week 3-4 of my PhD
excerpt: Nearing the first month of the PhD.
---

I need to find a better time to write these posts (almost 1am now).

Next Monday (September 18th, 2023) will mark the end of the first month of the PhD. I initially vowed to write a blog post every week, that will not work out. Turns out, my classes + research are keeping me busier than I thought they would be. In fact, this is the busiest I have ever been. I even had to skip the lectures of Fluid Dynamics this last week to keep up with my research. Over the last few weeks, I have been working on my homework (which I need to spend further less time on) and my research (coding + writing math + thinking, not in any particular order).

I have produced a few good LaTeX writeups and had very productive meetings with my advisor. Most excitingly, we are about to start a new project in a week or two that is related to **[**i cannot say but it is really exciting**]**. And, I have been learning how to write research style C++ code. This has allowed me to finalllyyyy learn about pointers and references, and a constantly increasing number of nuanced ways one writes optimized modern C++ code. So glad that CMakeLists.txt finally works properly haha. I hope to start training some new models in the next few days.

Taking a moment to reflect, I feel extremely happy with my degree. I am thoroughly enjoying my graduate education, and I am excited every single day to be a PhD student working on fascinating and important research.
